Artificial Intelligence and Computer Vision
The term artificial intelligence refers to computer systems performing complex tasks that would normally require the use of the human brain, such as visual perception (“computer vision”), speech recognition, and decision making.6 Early attempts at polyp detection required explicit programming of software to recognize certain polyp features (eg, textures and shapes).7 These early efforts were focused on recognizing still images because computer-processing speed at that time could not support real-time, live video image analysis. Since then, major advances in deep-learning algorithms using convolutional neural networks have dramatically expanded the capabilities of computer vision for endoscopy. These contemporary algorithms are trained on large data sets and can adapt and “learn” to recognize complex objects in live video.8 The most important applications of AI computer vision in colonoscopy today include computer-aided detection (CADe) and computer-aided diagnosis (CADx). CADe is designed to help the endoscopist detect polyps during colonoscopy and CADx is intended to accurately predict polyp histology without the need for a tissue biopsy.
Artificial Intelligence for Detection of Colorectal Polyps (Computer-Aided Detection)
AI detection of colorectal polyps was the first target for AI technology in gastroenterology and now a myriad of studies has reported the successful application of AI for the recognition of colon polyps using CADe. These algorithms are the equivalent of a highly trained set of eyes relentlessly scanning the monitor alongside the endoscopist, while simultaneously “flagging” lesions that potentially represent precancerous polyps (Figure 1). Urban and colleagues9 reported one of the earliest applications of convolutional neural network–based CADe on video clips. Their algorithm showed 97% sensitivity, 95% specificity, and 96% accuracy for detection of colorectal polyps, which was superior to the performance of the endoscopists. Importantly, 92% of polyps missed by the endoscopists were detected by the CADe.9 In the last several years, numerous prospective, multicenter studies have found that real-time use of AI CADe tools during colonoscopy leads to improvements in adenoma detection and other related performance metrics. A meta-analysis by Huang et al10 of 10 randomized controlled trials with 6629 patients found that both ADR (relative risk [RR], 1.43; P < .001) and polyp detection rate (RR, 1.44; P < .001) were significantly greater with AI-aided colonoscopy compared with routine colonoscopy. The adenomas detected per colonoscopy (APC) and polyps detected per colonoscopy were also significantly higher in the AI-aided group compared with the routine colonoscopy group.10